README.md, before:

The lost carving technique articles from defunct
[Bomber Online][old-bomber-site], rewritten to be mobile friendly.

Written in the 90's, during the peak of
[*Alpine Snowboarding*][alpine-snowboarding][^1] and it's subtypes:  
*Freecarving*[^2] & [*Alpine Snowboard Racing*][snowboard-racing].[^3]

The techniques transfer fully to *Softboot Snowboarding*.[^4]

---

### [Craving The Carve][craving-the-carve]

By Jack Michaud  
*December 1996*

### [Who is the "alpine rider?", Part I][alpine-rider-1]

By Cordon Baesel  
*Date Unknown*

### [Who is the "alpine rider?" - Part II][alpine-rider-2]

By Cordon Baesel  
*Date Unknown*

### [So You Want To Try Alpine Snowboarding?][try-alpine]

By Jack Michaud  
*Date Unknown*

### [Can You Start Snowboarding in Hardboots From Day One?][day-one-hardboots]

By Jack Michaud  
*Date Unknown*

### [The Norm, Part I][norm-part-1]

By Jack Michaud  
*Date Unknown*

### [The Norm, Part II][norm-part-2]

By Jack Michaud  
*Date Unknown*

### [The Toeside Problem][toeside-problem]

By Jack Michaud  
*Date Unknown*

### [Separate Zee Knees][separate-knees]

By Jack Michaud, with contributions from Jim Callen  
*Date Unknown*

### [Your Butt And Where It Should Not Be][butt-position]

By Dan Bogardus  
*Date Unknown*

### [Inclination vs. Angulation][inclination-angulation]

By Dan Bogardus  
*Date Unknown*

### [Regulating Edge Angle][regulating-edge-angle]

By Sean MacCaron  
*Date Unknown*

### [Toe Side, Stance, and Chatter][toeside-stance-chatter]

By Sean MacCaron  
*Date Unknown*

### [Cross-over, Cross-under, Cross through][cross-over-under-through]

By Jack Michaud  
*March 2002*

### ["Euro-Carves" - Another Look][eurocarves-look]

By Doug Taylor   
*Date Unknown*

### [Carving The Steeps][carving-steeps]

By Doug Taylor  
*Date Unknown*

### [Carving Practice Drills][carving-drills]

By Jack Michaud  
*Date Unknown*

### [Carving - Ranges of Movement][ranges-of-movement]

By Thomas Palka  
*April 2007*

### [Physics of a Snowboard Carve][carving-physics]

By Jack Michaud and Iain Duncumb  
*Date Unknown*

### [Snowboarding Equipment: Soft, Medium, or Hard?][snowboard-stiffness]

By Jack Michaud  
*~ 1999*

### [The Rise and Fall of the Holy Asymmetric Empire][assymetric-empire]

By Jack Michaud  
*December 1996*

## Additional Articles

The following articles primarily concern Alpine Snowboarding equipment
rather than carving technique.

#### [How to Buy an Alpine Snowboard][alpine-snowboard-guide]

By Jack Michaud  
*Date Unknown*

#### [Canting and Lift][canting-and-lift]

By Jack Michaud  
*Date Unknown*

## Something Missing?

Think somethings missing or amiss?  
Let me know by [opening a new issue][new-gh-issue].

## Footnotes

[^1]: **Alpine Snowboarding** is a specific type of snowboarding performed in
      hardshell ski-like boots & plate bindings.   
      It focuses on high-performance technical carving.  

[^2]: **Freecarving** is a carving style that converts potential energy to
      *g-force*.  
      **Race Carving** converts energy to *high downhill speed*.  
      Both started as disciplines of *Alpine Snowboarding*.

[^3]: **Alpine Snowboard Racing** refers to the Olympic events of
      **Parallel Slalom(PSL)** and **Parallel Giant Slalom(PGS)**.  
      Still only performed on *Alpine Snowboard* gear & techniques.

[^4]: **Softboot Snowboarding**, also known as just **Snowboarding**.  
      It's the usual snowboarding everyone knows,
      using soft boots and strap bindings.  
      Only called *"Softboot Snowboarding"* when comparing it to
      *Alpine Snowboarding* which uses hardboots and plate bindings.

[gh-page]: https://nicholaswmin.github.io/alpine-carving/
[old-bomber-site]: https://web.archive.org/web/20120501220353/http://www.bomberonline.com/
[alpine-snowboarding]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snowboarding#Alpine_snowboarding
[alpine-snowboarder]: http://alpinesnowboarder.com/
[new-gh-issue]: https://github.com/nicholaswmin/alpine-carving/issues/new
[carved-turn]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carved_turn
[snowboard-racing]: https://www.redbull.com/us-en/snowboard-alpine-racing
[sbx]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snowboard_cross
[alpine-snowboarder_tech-articles]: http://alpinesnowboarder.com/tech-articles/
[bomber-online_tech-articles]: https://www.bomberonline.com/Manuals-Tech-Articles-and-Help_ep_82-1.html
[try-alpine]: articles/try-alpine/article.md
[day-one-hardboots]: articles/day-one-hardboots/article.md
[norm-part-1]: articles/norm-part-1/article.md
[norm-part-2]: articles/norm-part-2/article.md
[carving-drills]: articles/carving-drills/article.md
[toeside-problem]: articles/toeside-problem/article.md
[separate-knees]: articles/separate-knees/article.md
[carving-steeps]: articles/carving-steeps/article.md
[toeside-stance-chatter]: articles/toeside-stance-chatter/article.md
[carving-physics]: articles/carving-physics/article.md
[alpine-snowboard-guide]: articles/alpine-snowboard-guide/article.md
[canting-and-lift]: articles/canting-and-lift/article.md
[alpine-rider-1]: articles/alpine-rider-1/article.md
[alpine-rider-2]: articles/alpine-rider-2/article.md
[assymetric-empire]: articles/assymetric-empire/article.md
[butt-position]: articles/butt-position/article.md
[craving-the-carve]: articles/craving-the-carve/article.md
[cross-over-under-through]: articles/cross-over-under-through/article.md
[eurocarves-look]: articles/eurocarves-look/article.md
[inclination-angulation]: articles/inclination-angulation/article.md
[ranges-of-movement]: articles/ranges-of-movement/article.md
[regulating-edge-angle]: articles/regulating-edge-angle/article.md
[snowboard-stiffness]: articles/snowboard-stiffness/article.md

Commit message:

added missing hyperlinks, added an article

README.md, after:

The lost carving technique articles from defunct
[Bomber Online][old-bomber-site], rewritten to be mobile friendly.

Written in the 90's, during the peak of
[*Alpine Snowboarding*][alpine-snowboarding][^1] and it's subtypes:  
*Freecarving*[^2] & [*Alpine Snowboard Racing*][snowboard-racing].[^3]

The techniques transfer fully to *Softboot Snowboarding*.[^4]

---

### [Craving The Carve][craving-the-carve]

By Jack Michaud  
*December 1996*

### [Who is the "alpine rider?", Part I][alpine-rider-1]

By Cordon Baesel  
*Date Unknown*

### [Who is the "alpine rider?" - Part II][alpine-rider-2]

By Cordon Baesel  
*Date Unknown*

### [So You Want To Try Alpine Snowboarding?][try-alpine]

By Jack Michaud  
*Date Unknown*

### [Can You Start Snowboarding in Hardboots From Day One?][day-one-hardboots]

By Jack Michaud  
*Date Unknown*

### [The Norm, Part I][norm-part-1]

By Jack Michaud  
*Date Unknown*

### [The Norm, Part II][norm-part-2]

By Jack Michaud  
*Date Unknown*

### [The Toeside Problem][toeside-problem]

By Jack Michaud  
*Date Unknown*

### [Separate Zee Knees][separate-knees]

By Jack Michaud, with contributions from Jim Callen  
*March 1997*

### [Your Butt And Where It Should Not Be][butt-position]

By Dan Bogardus  
*Date Unknown*

### [Inclination vs. Angulation][inclination-angulation]

By Dan Bogardus  
*Date Unknown*

### [Regulating Edge Angle][regulating-edge-angle]

By Sean MacCaron  
*Date Unknown*

### [Toe Side, Stance, and Chatter][toeside-stance-chatter]

By Sean MacCaron  
*Date Unknown*

### [Cross-over, Cross-under, Cross through][cross-over-under-through]

By Jack Michaud  
*March 2002*

### ["Euro-Carves" - Another Look][eurocarves-look]

By Doug Taylor   
*Date Unknown*

### [Carving The Steeps][carving-steeps]

By Doug Taylor  
*Date Unknown*

### [Carving Practice Drills][carving-drills]

By Jack Michaud  
*Date Unknown*

### [Carving - Ranges of Movement][ranges-of-movement]

By Thomas Palka  
*April 2007*

### [Physics of a Snowboard Carve][carving-physics]

By Jack Michaud and Iain Duncumb  
*Date Unknown*

### [Snowboarding Equipment: Soft, Medium, or Hard?][snowboard-stiffness]

By Jack Michaud  
*~ 1999*

### [The Rise and Fall of the Holy Asymmetric Empire][assymetric-empire]

By Jack Michaud  
*December 1996*

## Additional Articles

The following articles primarily concern Alpine Snowboarding equipment
rather than carving technique.

### [How to Buy an Alpine Snowboard][alpine-snowboard-guide]

By Jack Michaud  
*Date Unknown*

### [Canting and Lift][canting-and-lift]

By Jack Michaud  
*Date Unknown*

### [How to Setup Your Plate Bindings][setup-plate-bindings]

By Jack Michaud  
*Date Unknown*

## Something Missing?

Think somethings missing or amiss?  
Let me know by [opening a new issue][new-gh-issue].

## Footnotes

[^1]: **Alpine Snowboarding** is a specific type of snowboarding performed in
      hardshell ski-like boots & plate bindings.   
      It focuses on high-performance technical carving.  

[^2]: **Freecarving** is a carving style that converts potential energy to
      *g-force*.  
      **Race Carving** converts energy to *high downhill speed*.  
      Both started as disciplines of *Alpine Snowboarding*.

[^3]: **Alpine Snowboard Racing** refers to the Olympic events of
      **Parallel Slalom(PSL)** and **Parallel Giant Slalom(PGS)**.  
      Still only performed on *Alpine Snowboard* gear & techniques.

[^4]: **Softboot Snowboarding**, also known as just **Snowboarding**.  
      It's the usual snowboarding everyone knows,
      using soft boots and strap bindings.  
      Only called *"Softboot Snowboarding"* when comparing it to
      *Alpine Snowboarding* which uses hardboots and plate bindings.

[gh-page]: https://nicholaswmin.github.io/alpine-carving/
[old-bomber-site]: https://web.archive.org/web/20120501220353/http://www.bomberonline.com/
[alpine-snowboarding]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snowboarding#Alpine_snowboarding
[alpine-snowboarder]: http://alpinesnowboarder.com/
[new-gh-issue]: https://github.com/nicholaswmin/alpine-carving/issues/new
[carved-turn]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carved_turn
[snowboard-racing]: https://www.redbull.com/us-en/snowboard-alpine-racing
[sbx]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snowboard_cross
[alpine-snowboarder_tech-articles]: http://alpinesnowboarder.com/tech-articles/
[bomber-online_tech-articles]: https://www.bomberonline.com/Manuals-Tech-Articles-and-Help_ep_82-1.html
[try-alpine]: articles/try-alpine/article.md
[day-one-hardboots]: articles/day-one-hardboots/article.md
[norm-part-1]: articles/norm-part-1/article.md
[norm-part-2]: articles/norm-part-2/article.md
[carving-drills]: articles/carving-drills/article.md
[toeside-problem]: articles/toeside-problem/article.md
[separate-knees]: articles/separate-knees/article.md
[carving-steeps]: articles/carving-steeps/article.md
[toeside-stance-chatter]: articles/toeside-stance-chatter/article.md
[carving-physics]: articles/carving-physics/article.md
[alpine-snowboard-guide]: articles/alpine-snowboard-guide/article.md
[canting-and-lift]: articles/canting-and-lift/article.md
[alpine-rider-1]: articles/alpine-rider-1/article.md
[alpine-rider-2]: articles/alpine-rider-2/article.md
[assymetric-empire]: articles/assymetric-empire/article.md
[butt-position]: articles/butt-position/article.md
[craving-the-carve]: articles/craving-the-carve/article.md
[cross-over-under-through]: articles/cross-over-under-through/article.md
[eurocarves-look]: articles/eurocarves-look/article.md
[inclination-angulation]: articles/inclination-angulation/article.md
[ranges-of-movement]: articles/ranges-of-movement/article.md
[regulating-edge-angle]: articles/regulating-edge-angle/article.md
[snowboard-stiffness]: articles/snowboard-stiffness/article.md
[setup-plate-bindings]: articles/setup-plate-bindings/article.md
